Novichok. A spoonful
could kill thousands.
Do not go in that house.
Repeat, do not go in that house.
Ourjob is not
to find out who did it
but to keep the people
of Salisbury safe.
What happened 7
Is he going to be OK?
I don’t know. We don’t know the
source of contamination or have an
established chain of events.
All we do know is that
for the people in Salisbury, we are
their only line of defence.
The Salisbury Poisonings,
across three nights:
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, Nadhim Zahawi, the
Business and Industry Minister,
formerty
formerly minister
Business and Industry Minister,
formerly ministerfor
formerly minister for children and
formerty minister for children and
families.
formerly minister for children and
families. Labour’s newly appointed
Shadow
ShadowJustice Secretary, David
Shadow justice Secretary, David
hmmﬁ
ShadowJustice Secretary, David
Lemmy. Donna Kinnair, trained nurse
lammy. Donna Kinnair, trained nurse
and specialist in
Lemmy. Donna Kinnair, trained nurse
and specialist in medical law and
child protection, now
child protection, new chief
executive of the Royal
child protection, now chief
executive of the Royal College of
Nursing. Joining us down the line
Nursing. joining us down the line
from
Nursing. Joining us down the line
from Aberdeen, professor of
bacteriology at Aberdeen University
and expert on diseases like E. Coli
and BSE, Hugh Pennington. Welcome to
my guests here in the studio and to
7°“-
you, and to shoot down the line. We
are delighted to have a virtual
audience with us, courtesy of video
links, and this week they are from
Southampton. Hello to all of you,
very nice to have you here. If you
are watching from home, you can
are watching from home, you canjoin
are watching from home, you ranjoin
in the
are watching from home, you canjoin
in the conversation on social media.
Let’s start with our first question,
which is from Olu Rowe. Thank you.
Recent events in the US are arguably
a direct result of decades or
centuries of African—Americans
centuries of African-Americans
feeling
centuries of African—Americans
feeling oppressed in numerous areas,
including rareer
including career opportunities,
health care, economics or politics.
health rare, economic or politic.
To what
health care, economics or politics.
To what extent does the panel think
that the UK suffers from similar
systematic racial issues, and what
do you believe we can do to address
do you believe we ran do to address
this? of
do you believe we can do to address
this? Of course, this is prompted by
the horrific death of George Floyd
in Minneapolis. David? Well, er...
George Floyd looks like us, could be
us, but
us, butl
George Floyd looks like us, could be
us, but I think what’s striking
about this moment is that, when you
look at the protest, it’s black and
white, it’s of course many young
peopla, all
people, all kinds of people saying
peopla, all kinds of peopla saying
enough is
people, all kinds of people saying
enough is enough. And his last words
were, I
were, Iran’t
enough is enough. And his last words
were, I can’t breathe. People are
saying, not just
saying, notjust in America but also
saying, not just in America but also
in this country,
saying, notjust in America but also
in this country, of course, that
none of us can breathe, none of us
none of us ran breathe, none of us
ran breathe
none of us can breathe, none of us
can breathe with this structural
ran breathe with this stmctural
racism
can breathe with this structural
racism and discrimination that is,
yes, "TY
yes, very deep in America but is
also present in our own society.
David Cameron asked me to do a
review four years ago on the
problems of an overrepresentation of
problams of an overrepresentation of
black
problems of an overrepresentation of
black and Asians and minority ethnic
peopla in the
people in the criminal
black and Asians and minority ethnic
people in the criminaljustice
peopla in the criminal justice
system,
people in the criminaljustice
system, and it is the case that, in
system, and it is the rase that, in
our own country,
system, and it is the case that, in
our own country, you are nine times
more likely to be stopped and
searched by the police. During this
coronavims,
coronavirus, 52% of those who are
coronavims, 5296 of those who are
getting fines
coronavirus, 52% of those who are
getting fines are black, Asian or
minority ethnic people. Over the
last, well, since 1990, 183 black,
Asian and minority ethnic people
Asian and minority ethnic peopla
have
Asian and minority ethnic people
have died in police custody stop so
we have our own problems here. What
we have our own problems here. what
ran you do? Well,
we have our own problems here. What
can you do? Well, the first thing is
ran you do? Well, the first thing is
all of us
can you do? Well, the first thing is
all of us have to stop accepting ——
all of us have to stop accepting --
expecting black
all of us have to stop accepting ——
expecting black people to make the
rase
use for
expecting black people to make the
case for structural racism and
use for stmctural racism and
educate
case for structural racism and
educate yourself of there are some
fantastic books out there by various
authors who have written about the
subject. Educate yourself stop
challenge your friends, your family,
of course, on social media, people
of course, on social media, peopla
who are dearty
of course, on social media, people
who are clearly racist, it’s got to
who are dearty racist, it’s got to
stop. when
who are clearly racist, it’s got to
stop. When you look at social media,
stop. when you look at social media,
it’s full of it,
stop. When you look at social media,
it’s full of it, and I will see it
again tonight after the end of the
show. Ask your politicians, your MP,
your councillor to do something
about racial profiling. Get involved
and, if you must protest, I applaud
and, ifyou must protest, Iapplaud
those who
and, if you must protest, I applaud
those who are taking to the streets
in our country, dog did you take to
the streets? Brexit because I’m a
pub“:
public servant, I have a position of
7 7! 7 7777777 77777 7 777 777, 77 ,
Mud-positioni— —
. .
W“ I
mum ' mm. '°n.°f_.—
you can’t
responsibility and I think you ain’t
on
responsibility and I think you can’t
on one week condemn Dominic Cummings
for travelling up the country and
the next go out in public. Because
of social distance? Socially
distance, take your sanitiser, where
your mask but, yes, protest, make
some noise and take this all the way
to November, because we know what
Donald Tmmp is
Donald Trump is up to. This is
Donald Tmmp is up to. This is
deliberate,
Donald Trump is up to. This is
deliberate, the military, they are
railing for
calling for shooting, his behaviour,
railing for shooting, his behaviour,
he is winding
calling for shooting, his behaviour,
he is winding up parts of his face
who want to see this conflict
between black and white in his
country, because he thinks it might
keep him in office. Stand up to it.
Your question was about does the UK
suffer from
sufferfrom similar
Your question was about does the UK
suffer from similar systemic racial
issues. What is your view and
issues. what is your view and
experience?
issues. What is your view and
experience? Well, I
experience? Well, Ithink, without
question, I think everyone would
know. I think we’ve come from a
time, talking about going back
decades and centuries, where there
were structural implementations that
were stmctural implementations that
were
were structural implementations that
were conscious that disadvantaged
black people and people of colour,
black peopla and peopla of colour,
and
black people and people of colour,
and then we’ve moved forward into a
situation whereby it’s probably
stubborn, a stubborn approach to,
0K, we know there is something going
on. No, we are not really ready to
do that yet. And then, probably more
recently, it’s been more like an
apathy for sub is the spotlight on
us? Not really, let’s leave it for a
bit. But now the spotlight is on,
and obviously prevention is always
better than cure, and here we are in
a situation where, if prevention had
been implemented, then we wouldn’t
see the ugliness that we’ve seen, in
terms of... What I mean is, in terms
terms of... what I mean is, in terms
of the protest, I’m
terms of... What I mean is, in terms
of the protest, I’m not calling that
ugliness, I’m calling that desperate
ugliness, I’m falling that desperate
and
ugliness, I’m calling that desperate
and passionate. These are ugly
scenes, nobody wants to see this.
They have been lots of peaceful
protests and you are talking about
those where there has been violence
and looting. Yes. I wanted to ask,
Donna, looking at your career, which
is stellar, you must have broken
through quite a few glass ceilings
to get where you have. You still see
systemic issues of racism in the UK?
As a nurse, you see it every day.
You see it both in the structure you
You see it both in the stmcture you
are within, in
You see it both in the structure you
are within, in the institution of
health, the NHS institution. If you
look at how many managers have
broken through the glass ceiling,
black managers, you will see there
are very few Philip but also, as a
nurse, we face these issues on a
daily basis stop at the outcomes for
our patients. Every single measure
that you ran
that you can apply, the outcomes are
that you ran apply, the outcomes are
worse for
that you can apply, the outcomes are
worse for black and minority ethnic
patients. Whether it is diabetes,
whether it is those that end up with
amputations, the structure of our
amputations, the stmcture of our
society is
amputations, the structure of our
society is inherent, the structural
society is inherent, the stmctural
racism is
society is inherent, the structural
racism is inherent, and the outcomes
are poor for a
are poorfor a number of people that
are poor for a number of peopla that
are of black,
are poorfor a number of people that
are of black, Asian and minority
ethnic communities. 50,
ethnic communities. So, personally
to me in
ethnic communities. 50, personally
to me in terms of my career, yes, we
do have to bash down some glass
ceilings and circumvent some overtly
racist peopla,
racist people, but for me just look
racist peopla, but for me just look
at the
racist people, but for me just look
at the health of our nation, and
that will tell you about some of the
structural inequalities that we
stmctural inequalities that we
have.
structural inequalities that we
have. Is racism something you have
had direct experience of? Yes, to
the question, I don’t think anyone
of my colour or Olu ‘s, or David or
Donna would say they haven’t, it’ll
most impossible to when we first
name
came to this country, my parents
fame to this country, my parents
fame as
came to this country, my parents
came as Kurdish immigrants from
fame as Kurdish immigrants from
Iran, the
came as Kurdish immigrants from
Iran, the first thing people called
Iran, the first thing peopla rallad
me was
Iran, the first thing people called
me was a Pakistani, and then I had
to explain that I was really
Kurdish, and then you got bullied. I
saw a horrific video online of two
white kids are scared black kid to
go down and kiss their feet. You get
that sort of behaviour at school at
the time. But you try and survive
it. I’d like to think things have
changed and they have in many ways,
but I think some of it has been
transformed to social media. Back to
David Button point or mine or Donna,
you still get casual racism every
day, he doesn’t quite belong in
Stratford—on—Avon, you know, he
Stratford-on-Avon, you know, he
isn’t from
Stratford—on—Avon, you know, he
isn’t from here. That sort of thing
that it’s difficult for somebody
with a name like Zahawi to claim he
is born and bred in Stratford but
nonetheless I think things are
getting better and lots of people
are speaking up. Millions of people
are speaking up. Millions of peopla
have
are speaking up. Millions of people
have come out and said, enough is
enough. Tag the equalities minister
said today that the UK plan, Cribbs
is one of the best countries in the
world the quality
because there are lots of great
things that happened in this country
that have allowed people like
that have allowed peopla like
myself,
that have allowed people like
myself, David and Donat to do well,
but we can
but we ran go
myself, David and Donat to do well,
but we can go much further. I did
but we ran go much further. I did
this in the
but we can go much further. I did
this in the Department for Education
when I was families minister,
working with the permanent
secretary, because the permanent
secretary there basically didn’t
think that we were trying hard
enough because, if you look at the
profile of the civil service, of
parliamentarians, there are very few
partiamentarians, there are very few
people of my
parliamentarians, there are very few
people of my colour or David Button
peopla of my colour or David Button
colour in
people of my colour or David Button
colour in the leadership roles in
those institutions. Even in the
health service. We need to do
better. There is no point us
better. There is no point usjust
better. There is no point us just
saying, it’s OK,
better. There is no point usjust
saying, it’s OK, and that’s fine. We
have to do better. I have to share
this with the audience. My
seven—year—old came up to me,
seven-year-old name up to me,
unprompted,
seven—year—old came up to me,
unprompted, and said, dad, black
lives matter, and I looked and said,
where did you get that from? She
says, dad, I got it from TikTok and
YouTube stop I said, what does it
mean? She says, it means nobody
should be killed because of their
colour. So presumably Trump’s
comments about, when the looting
starts, the shooting starts, you
condemn that? any comments which
caused division, I condemn that. I
condemn that, at any other comment
which divides us. George W Bush made
which divides us. George w Bush made
a
which divides us. George W Bush made
a beautiful statement about how you
bring people together, the country
together, and I want to think of the
millions of people who will
peacefully go out and demonstrate
the not the few agitators for the
let’s hear from our
let’s hearfrom our audience. Laura.
let’s hear from our audience. laura.
I
Ijust
let’s hear from our audience. laura.
I just want to say
let’s hearfrom our audience. Laura.
I just want to say that you are
talking about how you want to
address the racism in this country,
but the problem is, if we don’t
start speaking out, if the
government doesn’t start speaking
out and condemning what is going on
in America right now then we are
being bystanders and watching this
happen, and we are not trying to
stop it, and I think it’s all well
and good leaving the responsibility
to the public to be protesting at a
time and we should be social
distancing but, because the
government is doing nothing, they
are complicit in the action the
pub“:
public is having to take to show our
support for America,
support forAmerica, because
public is having to take to show our
support for America, because nobody
in the government is doing that.
First of all, I want to thank David
Lammy for the work he has done on
educating nonblack people for years
educating nonblack peopla for years
on this
educating nonblack people for years
on this issue. But I also wanted to
address Nadhim Zahawi in asking him
what his government is doing to
improve the curriculum in schools? I
think a huge amount of the problem
here comes from a lack of education
about black history in the UK,
because it’s all well and good as
looking at the United States now
from a distance and saying, this
isn’t our problem, but we had a
isn’t our problam, but we had a
huge, long
isn’t our problem, but we had a
huge, long history in the UK from
slavery at our ports to Windrush,
slavery at our ports to windrush,
the
slavery at our ports to Windrush,
the MacPherson report, and then
Diane Abbott becoming one of the
first black MPs in the country. We
don’t learn that and now we have
Bellingham agenda, who it looks like
the justice system has given up on,
and it’s because we don’t learn
about these black voices, these
black faces, and we just don’t know
what our own history is. Hello. I
just think it’s horrible, what’s
just think it’s horribla, what’s
happened,
just think it’s horrible, what’s
happened, but I wondered whether,
bearing in mind all the positive
vibes we’ve had, clapping every
Thursday, we know that a lot of the
peopla, and I
peopla, and lam
Thursday, we know that a lot of the
people, and I am sure Donna will
peopla, and I am sure Donna will
agree with me,
people, and I am sure Donna will
agree with me, who looked after us
come from ethnic minorities. Should
we not be harnessing that power and
doing something with it right now,
rather than allowing it to
disappear? I wondered whether any of
the politicians had ideas how we
could do this. Hugh Pennington, I
wanted to come to you on the
original question. To what extent
does the panel think the UK suffers
from systematic racial issues
similar to those in the States, and
what ran
what can be done about it? Now, you
what ran be done about it? Now, you
were marching
what can be done about it? Now, you
were marching after the death of
Martin Luther King, so you have seen
this over many years. Custom cut
that’s right. Really rather
pessimistic. I lived in the US at
that time, and there were terrible
things happening, and I went to
Chicago and the National Guard was
out on the streets everything seems
to repeat itself of the I think an
important thing we must do, and I
agree with the audience member who
was talking about history, the US
has this terrible legacy of slavery,
and we have a legacy from the
Empire. Clearly, these are very
Empire. Clearty, these are very
important
Empire. Clearly, these are very
important historical things which
still have a big effect and, if we
learn more about them... We should
be learning about them at school,
learning about what happened at what
should be done correct any kind of
problams that
problems that persist, and we know
problams that persist, and we know
that many
problems that persist, and we know
that many problems do persist. My
that many problams do persist. My
pessimism
that many problems do persist. My
pessimism will stay. I hope I am
going to be more optimistic than
that. After all, the US elected a
that. After all, the US eluted a
black
that. After all, the US elected a
black president, but it’s a work in
progress. But it is work in progress
that we must put our shoulder behind
to make sure that things do improve.
ﬂ
I have got one more question, given
what is happening these days, we
really wanted to discuss the issue
of race at the beginning of this
programme and we have got a
different take on it from Ashya
Roberts. Can we hear your question?
Roberts. (“an we hear your question?
MY
My question is
Roberts. Can we hear your question?
My question is should the government
actively be doing more to
actively be doing more to protect
peopla from
people from ethnic minorities
peopla from ethnic minorities
against
people from ethnic minorities
against the virus? We had a report
against the vims? We had a report
and you will be
against the virus? We had a report
and you will be familiar with this.
Age and sex are the biggest factors
when it comes to coronavirus. But
then you look at the Bangladeshi
ethnicity, that is double the death
rate of coronavirus compared to the
white British and then other black
Asian and minority ethnic groups
tend to 50% more at risk. Is there
tend to 5096 more at risk. Is there
more that
tend to 50% more at risk. Is there
more that can be done in terms of
more that ran be done in terms of
staff, for
more that can be done in terms of
staff, for example? Is there more
staff, for exampla? Is there more
that ran
staff, for example? Is there more
that can be done to protect them as
that ran be done to protect them as
opposed to
that can be done to protect them as
opposed to their white counterparts?
There has to be more that needs to
be done. That whole report was
commissioned on the basis of the
question of why is this happening?
Yet we have had surveillance, we
have got statistics, but we have not
have got statistic, but we have not
yet answered
have got statistics, but we have not
yet answered why. Nobody expected an
answer to come overnight, but surely
there is much more we can do to
there is much more we ran do to
protect nursing
there is much more we can do to
protect nursing staff. I think there
is something about adequate PPE and
I was on this programme not long ago
saying we needed the adequate PPE.
Are you getting that now? It is
still patchy. There are some
hospitals that are getting it, but
we know many care homes are
we know many rare homes are
stmggling to
we know many care homes are
struggling to receive PPE. We also
stmggling to receive PPE. We also
know
struggling to receive PPE. We also
know that those district nurses are
still struggling to get proper PPE.
still stmggling to get proper PPE.
It is
still struggling to get proper PPE.
It is interesting that we have had
the latest announcement about face
coverings. . .
coverings... Face coverings on
pub“:
public transport will be required
from the 15th of
from the 15th ofJune. But we
from the 15th of june. But we
struggle to
from the 15th ofJune. But we
struggle to get nurses to have masks
when they are less than a metre away
providing rare to
providing care to patients. There
providing rare to patients. There
has to be
providing care to patients. There
has to be more. Do you think that
the main community nurses should be
prioritised when it comes to the
stats that we know and the more at
risk they are? We do not know from
this report whether it is linked to
occupation or exposure. We know the
viral load increases the more
exposed you are to the virus. Many
exposed you are to the vims. Many
black, Asian
exposed you are to the virus. Many
black, Asian and minority ethnic
peopla work
people work in front line
conditions, most of our nurses are
at band five delivering care, our
at band five delivering rare, our
health
at band five delivering care, our
health care assistance, and there
health rare assistance, and there
are many
health care assistance, and there
are many questions yet to be
answered. Obviously I am a public
health nurse and I am looking for
protection before the answer occur.
So as much protection that we can
So as much protection that we ran
give people is
So as much protection that we can
give people is absolutely essential.
If that means that those with
undertying
underlying conditions are redeployed
undertying conditions are redeployed
from
underlying conditions are redeployed
from the front line, so be it. Their
protection is hugely important. That
goes to my concern about the
question that was as previously. I
stood on the front line trying to
fight for patients permit lives a
few weeks ago and I do not want to
see that trash. I put my own life at
risk and so have many other health
rare
care workers. We really wa nt
risk and so have many other health
care workers. We really want people
rare workers. We really want people
if they are
care workers. We really want people
if they are protesting to observe
social distancing because there is
no point in us coming back to look
after them because of another cause.
11 weeks now we have had this look
down and she is still seen people
who have not got PPE. How is that
possibla? First
possible? First of all, that should
possibla? First of all, that should
not be
possible? First of all, that should
not be happening. I can tell you
not be happening. I ran tell you
from my own
not be happening. I can tell you
from my own local experience, both
from my own [oral experience, both
rare
from my own local experience, both
care homes and the NHS, they have
rare homes and the NHS, they have
got the PPE
care homes and the NHS, they have
got the PPE that they need. That is
OK, but it is 11 weeks on and I have
had countless people from the
government saying we are sorting it,
we are getting it out next weekend,
all the lorries are on the way, it
is not a question of supply, it is
logistic,
logistics, which turned out not to
logistic, which turned out not to
be the
logistics, which turned out not to
be the case in the end, how are we
be the use in the end, how are we
11 weeks on,
be the case in the end, how are we
11 weeks on, Donna is sitting there,
and we still have not got PPE where
peopla
people need it? Both the experience
[orally and
locally and nationally with the PPE
[orally and nationally with the PPE
is
locally and nationally with the PPE
is there. In Warwickshire it is
therefore any care home as they
therefore any rare home as they
asked
therefore any care home as they
asked for. That is all very well.
You have heard Donna’s experience. I
am trying to answer the question.
Don had a specific example and I
will take that away and look at it
because that should not be
happening. What I will say in answer
happening. what I will say in answer
to your
happening. What I will say in answer
to your question is a couple of
things. Professor
things. ProfessorJohn Newton, the
things. Professor john Newton, the
expert on this,
things. ProfessorJohn Newton, the
expert on this, said that now that
we have got the report the first
thing that will happen is NHS
England is getting it out to the NHS
tmsts
trusts so they all have the data in
front of them. Secondly, equalities
minister is now in charge of making
sure that whatever we do we follow
the report findings and effectively
take that and translate that into
actions that we will take to make
sure actually people of black, Asian
sure actually peopla of black, Asian
and minority
sure actually people of black, Asian
and minority ethnic backgrounds are
protected. Hugh Pennington. The
report was disappointing in the fact
it did not come out with answers as
to why peopla
to why people from Bangladesh are
to why peopla from Bangladesh are
more likely
to why people from Bangladesh are
more likely to die from this virus
than other people of other different
ethnic backgrounds. I can understand
ethnic backgrounds. I ran understand
why, to drill
ethnic backgrounds. I can understand
why, to drill down to the data you
have to look at patients’ hospital
have to look at patients“ hospital
records
have to look at patients’ hospital
records to look at their particular
circumstances. I sincerely hope that
is proceeding with pace because that
will be quite a long task. It will
take a long time to do. I do this
sort of thing for medical and legal
work and it is very time consuming.
However, it has to be done because
we want to find out what is going
wrong. why
wrong. Why are people, say from
wrong. why are peopla, say from
Bangladesh,
wrong. Why are people, say from
Bangladesh, because they were at the
top of the list in terms of
mortality, why are they in that
group? We cannot understand it. We
don’t know. Is it something to do
with lifestyle? Housing?
Deprivation? Occupation? We cannot
say. It is possible, that data is
out there, but it will be difficult
to accumulate it. We want to get
that right now because the virus has
not gone away. All these groups of
people with high mortality rates,
peopla with high mortality rates,
that is
people with high mortality rates,
that is a
peopla with high mortality rates,
that is a very
people with high mortality rates,
that is a very strong measure, you
rannot laugh
cannot laugh that off, of course
not, it is rightly important that
while the virus persists we must do
something to protect people who are
something to protect peopla who are
more at
something to protect people who are
more at risk in terms of having a
very serious infection and dying
from it. It is a no—brainer. We have
from it. It is a no-brainer. We have
got to get that
from it. It is a no—brainer. We have
got to get that work done. If you
have to hire 20 PhD students to go
through the notes, we should be
doing it right now. Kieran, you have
got your hand up. In light of the
recent report is it safe for
children to now return to school and
workers to return to work from the
ethnic minorities? This is what it
comes down to. The question from
Ashya Roberts is what should the
government do to protect people?
where
Where do the results of that report
where do the results of that report
takers?
Where do the results of that report
takers? Does it take us down the
route of if you are from the BAME
community, should the lockdown be
tighter for
tighterfor you?
community, should the lockdown be
tighterforyou? Is
tighterfor you? Is that
community, should the lockdown be
tighter for you? Is that even
remotely acceptable to think that?
Should there be certain jobs you
Should there be certainjobs you
should
Should there be certain jobs you
should not be going back to? Or
children not going back to school?
Treating people differently because
of their ethnic background? Let’s be
clear, right across black and Asian
communities in this country there is
fear and anxiety. It is now getting
to the stage where it is hard not to
know someone who has died. I have
lost an undo, a
lost an uncle, a classmate at A5.
know someone who has died. I have
lost an uncle, a classmate at AS. I
lost an unda, a classmate at 45. I
have lost
lost an uncle, a classmate at AS. I
have lost 20 people in my local
have lost 20 peopla in my [oral
mosque and
have lost 20 people in my local
mosque and six others in the other
mosque. I have lost my Chief Rabbi
in the community of Tottenham and
in the community of Totbenham and
Haringey.
in the community of Tottenham and
Haringey. People want action. What
Haringey. People want action. what
they rannot
Haringey. People want action. What
they cannot understand is... What
they cannot understand is... what
action
they cannot understand is... What
action should there be? We are being
told where we can do physical
told where we ran do physical
exercise,
told where we can do physical
exercise, who we can meet, where we
exercise, who we ran meet, where we
ran travel, what
exercise, who we can meet, where we
can travel, what we should wear on
ran travel, what we should wear on
transport. There
can travel, what we should wear on
transport. There are guidelines and
mles. People
rules. People are told if you are of
mles. People are told if you are of
a certain age you
rules. People are told if you are of
a certain age you should protect
yourself and stay away from the rest
of your family.
of yourfamily. Ethnic
yourself and stay away from the rest
of your family. Ethnic minorities
now want recommendations. They want
risk assessments at work
particularly because we are talking
particularty because we are talking
about a
particularly because we are talking
about a community of people who
about a community of peopla who
arrived
about a community of people who
arrived from Asia and the Caribbean
who came to work in public services,
the NHS, post offices, our transport
system, London underground. They
come into contact with many people
come into contact with many peopla
and we
come into contact with many people
and we have no answers. I say to
Nadeem, I don’t want to say it in an
angry
5"ng WY-
Nadeem, I don’t want to say it in an
angry way, but I say we need action
now, not
now, notjust
angry way, but I say we need action
now, not just the
now, notjust the rhetoric about
angry way, but I say we need action
now, not just the rhetoric about all
this is terrible, but where we have
this is terribla, but where we have
had
this is terrible, but where we have
had guidelines and rules for others,
had guidelines and mles for others,
ran we
had guidelines and rules for others,
can we now have some to protect and
ran we now have some to protect and
save lives?
can we now have some to protect and
save lives? If protecting the NHS
and saving lives means something, it
has to mean something also for black
and ethnic minorities in our own
country. And to Kieran’s question.
801: of
80% of schools
country. And to Kieran’s question.
80% of schools remained open to make
8096 of schools remained open to make
sure that
80% of schools remained open to make
sure that the critical workers, the
front line workers, and those
children who are in need could
actually still get to school. We are
very slowly, deliberately slowly,
asking schools to return for the
earty years
early years and of course year one
earty years and of course year one
and six as
early years and of course year one
and six as well. No, that is not
what Kieran was talking about. I
want to get to the... We have only
got a limited time. You cannot have
half an answer. You need to answer
the question. Kieran’s point is
should
should children from black and Asian
minority and ethnic communities go
to school because of that? I was
about to say, if you allow me... I
am all ears. If we all follow the
social distancing rules, we have
social distancing mles, we have
issued
social distancing rules, we have
issued guidelines across education,
the environment, construction, the
the environment, constmction, the
warehouses,
the environment, construction, the
warehouses, if you follow the rules
warehouses, if you follow the mles
and socially
warehouses, if you follow the rules
and socially distance and you wash
your hands, you will be safe and we
will continue to bear down. Whew,
will continue to bear down. when,
you wanted to
will continue to bear down. Whew,
you wanted to come in. One thing we
ran say pretty
can say pretty certainly from the
ran say pretty certainly from the
Pub“:
can say pretty certainly from the
Public Health England report is that
children and anybody under 20 has a
very low risk of having any kind of
serious illness with this virus.
serious illness with this vims.
This very
serious illness with this virus.
This very small group of younger
children with Kawasaki
children with Kawasaki syndrome,
they are at risk, but that is very
rare. Young children do not fall ill
in the first place. This is a
peculiar virus because there is a
very strong relationship between age
and having a bad outcome. Those over
80 or 70 times more likely to die
than peopla in
than people in their 405. That is an
than peopla in their 405. That is an
enormously
than people in their 40s. That is an
enormously impressive statistic
which does not happen with any other
vims. I
vims. Iran
which does not happen with any other
vims. I ran put
virus. I can put that in as
reassurance that children will not
get a serious illness and they will
not have complications and so on.
But one question that has not been
answered is are they going to get
the virus and take it home and in
fact their parents and their
grandparents? That is something that
is still not certain. It does not
look very likely, but, but, you
cannot rule it out. Let’s take
cannot mla it out. Let’s take
another
cannot rule it out. Let’s take
another question from Lorraine
jones.
Jones. Doesn’t the 1A day quarantine
jones. Doesn’t the 14 day quarantine
for incoming
Jones. Doesn’t the 1A day quarantine
for incoming travellers to the UK
seem pointless when we are mostly
lagging behind the other European
countries in getting control of the
vims as
virus as the main EU countries now
have a lower transmission rate than
the UK? That is the point, is this a
use
rase of shutting
the UK? That is the point, is this a
case of shutting the stable door
rase of shutting the stable door
after
case of shutting the stable door
after the horse has bolted? When
after the horse has bolted? when
other
after the horse has bolted? When
other countries had a higher
infection rate we were letting them
in and we still are, you can still
in and we still are, you ran still
come in
in and we still are, you can still
come in from Brazil, from New York,
but now we are talking about
stopping countries. In the case of
stopping countries. In the rase of
Europe they
stopping countries. In the case of
Europe they have all got a lower
infection rates than we have.
It’s an important question. When
It’s an important question. when
this virus
It’s an important question. When
this virus was in the containment
phase, when we could contain it, it
was right that we introduced
quarantine and effectively dealing
with people coming from Li Wenliang
with peopla coming from Li Wenliang
and the
with people coming from Li Wenliang
and the rest of China in early
and the rest of China in earty
january. But
and the rest of China in early
January. But we let everybody else
january. But we let everybody else
come. As
January. But we let everybody else
come. As it turned out, the Italians
and the Spanish had a huge infection
rate but we let them come in. We
didn’t, because we stop people
coming from northern Italy and then
the whole of Italy, we did the same
for Iran and Japan and, early on,
for Iran and japan and, earty on,
from
for Iran and Japan and, early on,
from Wuhan and the whole of China.
from Wuhan and the whola of China.
when we
from Wuhan and the whole of China.
When we went from containment to
when we went from containment to
delay, when
When we went from containment to
delay, when the virus was already
spreading through our communities,
the scientists and the advice was to
say, actually, there is almost no
difference of actually doing
anything at ports and airports. But
now they are not advising you to
introduce quarantine, are they? Or
the advice now is, when infection
rates are low and coming down even
further, the risk from a spike from
outside the UK is much higher, which
is why we have introduced the
quarantine. We’ve also introduced a
review of it every three weeks so we
make sure we are able to
effectively, for example, and this
has been talked about, look at other
countries and build air bridges to
save countries, and that is an
important part of this. All of these
decisions are really difficult but
actually, when the virus is low and
coming down even further, it’s the
right thing to do to not allow
peopla to
people to come in without
quarantine. David. It’s got to be
based on the science. The WHA set
back in February, quarantine was
back in Febmary, quarantine was
generally
back in February, quarantine was
generally quarantined, Greece
quarantine, Taiwan quarantined, New
Zealand quarantined, we didn’t.
100,000 people came into the country
100,000 peopla came into the country
in january
100,000 people came into the country
inJanuary mocha
in January mocha
THEY SPEAK
inJanuary mocha
THEY SPEAK OVER
in January mocha
THEY SPEAK OVER EACH
inJanuary mocha
THEY SPEAK OVER EACH OTHER.
Now we have a situation where we
know 40,000 have died from Covid
but, if you look at the year—on—year
but, if you look at the year-on-year
figures, its
but, if you look at the year—on—year
figures, its 60,000 people have lost
figures, its 60,000 peopla have lost
over this
figures, its 60,000 people have lost
over this period stop we have got
the worst rate, in fact, we have a
higher rate and the whole of Europe
combined and now we are
quarantining? This feels like late.
We were late on the lockdown, late
on the testing, late on the PPE and
we are late again on quarantine. I
would listen to you if you didn’t
quote an inaccurate stat which was
been proven to be wrong. If we used
the same scale of measure is fame we
would have reported only 20 deaths
yesterday, and I’m sure the BBC at
some point... Is there a country in
Europe with a higher death rate than
us? Every death is a regrettable
thing. I
thing. lam not
us? Every death is a regrettable
thing. I am not sitting
thing. lam not sitting here
us? Every death is a regrettable
thing. I am not sitting here saying
thing. lam not sitting here saying
to you that
thing. I am not sitting here saying
to you that everything we have done
we have done well but, at the end of
this crisis, we will learn the
lessons, because it’s only right we
look at this, and we are trying to
be as transparent as we can, but
be as transparent as we ran, but
it’s wrong to
be as transparent as we can, but
it’s wrong to quote figures that are
completely spurious. Get a grip! We
are languishing globally. We are a
laughing stock. People have died.
It’s horrendous. People can’t
believe that Britain is so behind
the curve globally, because we have
been slow and dithering. It is
disappointing you are making this a
partisan point in the way care
stammer has done desperate Keir
Starmer. I want you to succeed
because I don’t want more people to
because I don’t want more peopla to
die, but... Is
die, but... Isto
because I don’t want more people to
die, but... Is to then take away the
inaccuracies and tell the truth and
don’t quote the BBC, which were
wrong last night, I hope they will
correct it tonight.
We are amongst numbers one, two and
three in the world for global name
16 cadets. There is no doubt. Even
if the figures come out slightly
higher in other countries we will
still be an outlier. And we have to
learn the lessons. I am not proud of
learn the lassons. I am not proud of
that. We
learn the lessons. I am not proud of
that. We have to learn the lessons.
The Prime Minister said he was proud
of our record. Custom I’m not proud
of the deaths. I’m proud of our
record to stand out assisting system
for a few thousand to 200,000 tests
a day to day. I’m proud of the
record of the NHS and the amazing
front line workers who make sure the
NHS never
NHS neverfailed or broke and
continued to treat people. I am
continued to treat peopla. I am
proud of
continued to treat people. I am
proud of what we have done in the
Treasury to make sure that
businesses got the money they need
to survive to make sure that 8.7
million peopla
million people get their wages today
from the furlough scheme. I am proud
of all of that. Donna, the question
is about quarantine. Is it pointless
now? It feels a bit late to me. I
will say that, on the 8th of March,
I had a trip booked to Italy and I
didn’t go because I could see what
was happening in Italy, but I could
have gone and come back, and it was
to Milan. And people from Italy
to Milan. And peopla from Italy
could
to Milan. And people from Italy
could come here first they were
asked to self—isolate when they
asked to self-isolate when they
arrived
asked to self—isolate when they
arrived but they could arrive. I
chose to lose the money from my
ﬂight because
flight because it seemed pointless
ﬂight because it seemed pointless
to go and
flight because it seemed pointless
to go and contaminate and bring it
back, but
back, butl
to go and contaminate and bring it
back, but I feel we were a bit late
to get to it. However, we are where
we are, and the important thing is
that we do the right thing, so it
isn’t about quarantine now, it’s
about us complying with the
standards, washing our hands, social
distancing, doing the right things
to protect ourselves from this
vims.
virus. The virus hasn’t gone away.
vims. The virus hasn’t gone away.
It’s still
virus. The virus hasn’t gone away.
It’s still virulent, we can all
It’s still virulant, we ran all
still
It’s still virulent, we can all
still catch it and we are where we
are. It’s a bit pointless, really,
we look back in history, because
we’ve had 40,000 deaths now and the
only thing we ran
only thing we can do is protect
ourselves going forward, and that’s
by complying with the science and
the guidance that we have. I think
that’s the important thing now.
(lient
Client Lorraine wanted to come back
(lient Lorraine wanted to come back
in.
(1ient Lorraine wanted to come back
in. Seems
Client Lorraine wanted to come back
in. Seems to me that we have missed
the boat and, if we are going to
quarantine, why wait until Monday
before we put it in place if it was
so important? Basically, up until
Monday, people could still come in,
Monday, peopla could still come in,
so what’s
Monday, people could still come in,
so what’s the point of it? Carrie.
Thank you for letting me join the
Thank you for [citing me join the
I’ve got quite
Thank you for letting me join the
I’ve got quite an important point to
make, as you were talking about
stats and testing at R rate. We are
specifically talking about
quarantine. 0K,
quarantine. OK, then I probably need
to rewind a bit. I was trying to
interject with David speaking I have
Covid and I’ve tested negative twice
and been told from my bloods that I
have it, and there is a 30% failure
have it, and there is a 3096 failure
rate with
have it, and there is a 30% failure
rate with the swabs, so we are
potentially missing 30 in 100 cases.
So how
50 how can we rely on those stats?
So how ran we rely on those stats?
where do
So how can we rely on those stats?
Where do we
So how ran we rely on those stats?
where do we go
So how can we rely on those stats?
Where do we go with that? I think we
where do we go with that? I think we
might come onto
Where do we go with that? I think we
might come onto testing later, so
I’m going to hold that thought, if
that’s all right. Thaddeus, you put
your hand up. I was
your hand up. I wasjust wondering,
your hand up. I was just wondering,
in any one
your hand up. I wasjust wondering,
in any one country,... Would they
let us travel there and travel back?
We have higher infection rates any
other country in Europe, but were
talking about not letting them come
talking about not latting them come
when
talking about not letting them come
when it’s probably safer for
when it’s probably saferfor them
talking about not letting them come
when it’s probably safer for them to
come here and not quarantine that it
is for us to go there and infect
them. There are quite a few
countries we can go to. Soon we can
countries we ran go to. Soon we ran
go to Italy to stop
countries we can go to. Soon we can
go to Italy to stop we can go to
go to Italy to stop we ran go to
Portugal now,
go to Italy to stop we can go to
Portugal now, I think, possibly
other countries. Whew. it’s a bit
other countries. whew. it’s a bit
academic
other countries. Whew. it’s a bit
academic because many countries will
not let us in because we have such a
high rate of infection. Do you think
we should have quarantine measures
had to stop people coming in? 7 0h,
had to
yeah. stop peopla '
comlng in? 7
. . 0h,
had to stop peopla coming in? ? Oh,
yeah. The time to
had to stop people coming in? 7 Oh,
yeah. The time to do that is when we
have a very low infection rate but
it isn’t very low yet it is coming
down very slowly. It is coming down
more slowly than the press
conference at Number Ten would like,
the experts there and so on. Until
it is down a lot further, then our
it is down a lot further, than our
residents
it is down a lot further, then our
residents will be welcomed in Italy
and Spain and Greece and all these
other countries. At the moment, I
don’t think they will let us in
because they have a better situation
than us and they don’t want to
import infection. It’s a bit early
import infection. It’s a bit earty
to be talking
import infection. It’s a bit early
to be talking about quarantine for
its right to make a plan when we get
to that happy point where we have
the virus right down to low levels
but at the moment I think one has to
55V
say that it’s a pity this wasn’t
done a long time ago, because my own
view, and it’s only a guess because
we don’t have the statistics
published, is that we have lots of
outbreaks in this country started
off by people coming back from high
incidence countries Italy
particularly, and the virus going
particularty, and the virus going
under
particularly, and the virus going
under the radar and causing lots of
infections, and changing in a subtle
infections, and changing in a subtia
way. We
infections, and changing in a subtle
way. We clearly don’t want that to
way. We dearty don’t want that to
happen in the
way. We clearly don’t want that to
happen in the future, so it’s a bit
earty to be
early to be talking about that now
because we still have this very high
infection rate and we have to get it
down before we can really get the
down before we ran really get the
quarantine
down before we can really get the
quarantine thing rolling. Its right
to make a plan for it but whether it
should come in on Monday or not,
well, I
well, Idon’t
should come in on Monday or not,
well, I don’t know. Hi.
well, Idon’t know. Hi. If
should come in on Monday or not,
well, I don’t know. Hi. If the
well, Idon’t know. Hi. Ifthe
government
well, I don’t know. Hi. If the
government brings in regulations
concerning quarantine, how
effectively are they going to be
able to actually enforce the
quarantine? There is talk of one in
five people being randomly checked,
but that is probably not good
enough. Does that mean they will be
checked once every five days, the
same person? Are the people in
quarantine going to be allowed to go
and shop and receive medical
suppﬁes?
supplies? I think realistically it’s
unenforceable stop I think the
suggestion is not quite as
favourable as you are making it. I
think it’s one in ten are expected
to be checked by border officials.
Let me ask you, Nadhim Zahawi.
People are required to supply an
address and a phone number. They can
address and a phone number. They ran
give you their
address and a phone number. They can
give you their mobile phone number,
so I am wondering what the point of
that is. If you give your mobile
phone, you can be anywhere if
someone rings and checks you are
supposedly where you say you are. If
suppos
you edly where yo
u 5.1
Y you a
re
. If
supposedly where you say you are. If
you go to Greece, you have to supply
a landline number or you can’t get
in. You have to fill in an online
form with the address and phone
number, and of course there is a
fine if they don’t comply with the
quarantine as well, but most people
quarantine as well, but most peopla
you will find,
quarantine as well, but most people
you will find, and before I became a
politician I ran a research company,
do the right thing. The reason we
have done well is because the
British people have done well and
British peopla have done well and
complied
British people have done well and
complied with the rules of social
complied with the mics of social
distancing,
complied with the rules of social
distancing, washing their hands...
So you think a mobile number is
adequate? Crop I think people will
adequate? Crop I think peopla will
do
adequate? Crop I think people will
do the right thing. If they are
coming to this country and filling
in a form and saying they will
quarantine, they will do the right
thing. We will keep this under
review and continued to take tough
decisions, because these are
difficult, and we need people to
work together. We can’t do this on
our own. But we know, the evidence
suggests that, when the incidence
rate is low, we should try and make
this work with our borders. Stick 3
this work with our borders. Stick a
question from
this work with our borders. Stick 3
question from Mike Golding. We are
always told that we are following
the science, but the government was
science advisers who we watch daily
on the update look and sound
increasingly nervous about the early
reduction in lockdown, before the UK
Test and Trace is fully operational
approval. Does the panel feel that
we are easing lockdown to quickly
and so risking more deaths, 3 second
and so risking more deaths, a second
wave of
and so risking more deaths, 3 second
wave of infection and, as a
consequence, further untold
increased damage to the UK economy
Hugh, you don’t believe a second
wave is likely at all, do you? Could
you explain? I’m calling myself a
you explain? I’m falling myself a
second
you explain? I’m calling myself a
second wave sceptic because the idea
of that is faced with what happened
within Fraser in 1918, and I don’t
think that’s a good model for the
stop in 1918, we were
stop in 1918, we werejust
think that’s a good model for the
stop in 1918, we were just coming
out of the First World War and the
virus was very different virus that
forced the second wave was very
different it attacks different
people stop it killed more American
peopla stop it killed more American
soldiers
people stop it killed more American
soldiers than the Germans did at end
of the First World War, and we don’t
even know the first wave virus was
the same as the second and we don’t
know if the third wave virus was the
same as the second or first because
the virus wasn’t discovered until
1933. What makes you think a second
1933. what makes you think a second
wave
1933. What makes you think a second
wave won’t happen with coronavirus,
wave won’t happen with coronavims,
given that we
wave won’t happen with coronavirus,
given that we are hearing from the
WHO and so many countries that there
are fears it will happen? I think
what would happen, if we got a lot
done wrong, it would not be a second
wave. That is defined as the first
wave goes away, then there is a gap
when nothing happens and then the
vims
virus takes off again. And that
hasn’t happened.
hasn’t happened. The big test is
hasn’t happened. The big testis
going to
hasn’t happened. The big test is
going to come in China, because
China has released its citizens from
lockdown and Sage, the advisory
committee, has been confident that
China will have a second wave. Time
will tell whether it does or not. No
sign yet. China is much more
worried, and all the cases in China
are imported from other countries.
So I think
50 I think the second wave... I
So I think the second wave... I
can’t say it won’t happen but I
think it’s unlikely to what will
happen is what happened in
Singapore, where they have very good
controls. When the virus got into
controls. when the virus got into
these migrant
controls. When the virus got into
these migrant worker dormitories and
took off, a bit like it took off and
is still busy in our care homes,
is still busy in our rare homes,
because
is still busy in our care homes,
because these are very difficult
places to have infection control.
The vims
The virus will hang around and it
won’t be a second wave, it will
won’t be a second wave, it willjust
won’t be a second wave, it will just
be the
won’t be a second wave, it willjust
be the continuation of outbreaks
hither and thither. Those are the
sort of noises coming from people
sort of noises coming from peopla
like
sort of noises coming from people
like Matt Hancock at the moment this
is what we have to worry about this
is what we have to stop without
contact tracing. That will enable us
contact tracing. That will enablc us
to identify
contact tracing. That will enable us
to identify these outbreaks. This
virus specialises in causing
outbreaks and about half the cases
outbreaks and about half the rases
are in
outbreaks and about half the cases
are in outbreaks, not single cases.
are in outbreaks, not singla cases.
We
are in outbreaks, not single cases.
We need the system up and running
We need the system up and mnning
before
We need the system up and running
before we do any massive release of
lockdown. I think what’s happened so
far is essentially pretty trivial
chipping away at the lockdown and
we’ll see whether that has any
effect on the R number and perhaps
we ran
we can talk about that later as
we ran talk about that later as
well, how
we can talk about that later as
well, how much, how busy the virus
is.
Mike, you wanted to come back in? I
think it is arbitrary, whatever you
rail it,
call it, whether you call it a
all it, whether you all it a
second
call it, whether you call it a
second wave or an increase in
infection. The point is, the R
number, we know, is very close to
one. It seems to me that the
government’s messaging, some
conscious, some unconscious, has led
conscious, some unconscious, has lad
towards quite
conscious, some unconscious, has led
towards quite significant increase
in traffic and people on beaches and
in traffic and peopla on beaches and
peopla at
in traffic and people on beaches and
people at beauty spots. And for
instance even protesting. You can
instance even protesting. You ran
see that
instance even protesting. You can
see that there are causes for
concern. Does that make you anxious?
Not for me personally, but it makes
me anxious for people around me, for
me anxious for peopla around me, for
peopla who we
me anxious for people around me, for
people who we know in our area who
peopla who we know in our area who
are in
people who we know in our area who
are in the at risk group. I would
say it would be going a bit far to
55V
say it makes me anxious, but it
certainly concerns me, I don’t want
to end up going back into a
lockdown. Let me ask the panel here.
The thrust of the question is, is
the lockdown being eased too early?
the lockdown being eased too earty?
At some point
the lockdown being eased too early?
At some point the lockdown has to be
eased as we go into the recovery
phase because we know that the
lockdown is taking its toll and
lives will be lost in terms of
economics anyway. At some point it
economic anyway. At some point it
needs to
economics anyway. At some point it
needs to be eased. But my view is
that actually we need to do it
sensibly. We have got to come out of
it sensibly, we have got to
understand the rules and people need
understand the mles and people need
to follow
understand the rules and people need
to follow them. I would go back to
saying, it depends on a really high
compliance to the rules that are put
compliance to the mles that are put
out there.
compliance to the rules that are put
out there. Even if we continue with
the lockdown, people are becoming
the lockdown, peopla are becoming
resﬂass
the lockdown, people are becoming
restless anyway, so we will have to
resﬂass anyway, so we will have to
do something
restless anyway, so we will have to
do something to mitigate that
restlessness and make sure we come
resﬂassness and make sure we come
out of
restlessness and make sure we come
out of lockdown safely. Do you think
now is the right time? I guess if we
ran
can maintain some of the things, the
ran maintain some of the things, the
handmshing
can maintain some of the things, the
handwashing kills the virus, we know
handmshing kills the virus, we know
it is still
handwashing kills the virus, we know
it is still amongst us and there are
steps we will have to take, we don’t
know how long it is going to hang
around, so we will have to live our
lives very differently in terms of
going forward. It will mean we will
have to socially distance for a
while longer. We will have to be
whila longer. We will have to be
more
while longer. We will have to be
more protective in the gear that we
wear. Whether we do it now, next
wear. whether we do it now, next
week or
wear. Whether we do it now, next
week or two months’ time, we have to
gradually come out, as long as we
have a sensible rationale for the
steps are taking. Annamarie. I was
steps are taking. Annamaria. I was
thinking along
steps are taking. Annemarie. I was
thinking along the same lines as
Donna. A lot of the measures the
government are bringing in at the
moment, quarantine, wearing
facemasks, social distancing, etc,
all rely on people’s goodwill and
the general public agreeing to these
measures. I was
measures. I wasjust
the general public agreeing to these
measures. I was just wondering what
the panel’s thoughts were on how can
the panel’s thoughts were on how ran
the government
the panel’s thoughts were on how can
the government actually try and
improve public goodwill with regards
to the introduction of track and
trace apps? It is very clear that
the public are getting a bit fed up
at the moment and going out on
beaches and clearly breaking a lot
beaches and dearty breaking a lot
of the
beaches and clearly breaking a lot
of the rules. Ben? I wanted to touch
of the mles. Ben? I wanted to touch
on something
of the rules. Ben? I wanted to touch
on something that Donna briefly
mentioned. While Mike is right to
mentioned. while Mike is right to
55V
say it is
mentioned. While Mike is right to
say it is important we listen to the
health experts, I think it is
equally important that we listen to
the economists. I think we are going
to approach a point soon where the
lives lost due to the economy being
shut down
shutdown exceed the lives lost
because of the virus. I have heard
because of the vims. I have heard
stories
because of the virus. I have heard
stories about chemotherapy care
stories about chemotherapy rare
being
stories about chemotherapy care
being delayed, suicide and mental
health wards are going up, and in
schools, the deprived children who
are falling behind because of school
closures, universities closed and
teaching isn’t being delivered. This
will have effects for years to come
and I think it is really time to
start getting out of this lockdown
now. David, coming back to my’s
now. David, coming back to mrs
original
now. David, coming back to my’s
original question, is the lockdown
being eased too early? In part it is
being eased too earty? In part it is
because
being eased too early? In part it is
because track and trace is not up
and mnning. I
and running. Iwould
because track and trace is not up
and running. I would support
and mnning. Iwould support
relaxing the
and running. I would support
relaxing the lockdown but it has to
be based on the science and clearly
be based on the science and dearty
we are
be based on the science and clearly
we are worried about the R number.
You have got to sort out testing and
you have got to make sure that
peopla ran
people can get access to a test in
peopla ran get access to a test in
24 hours
people can get access to a test in
2A hours and get the results and 2A
24 hours and get the results and 24
hours. You
2A hours and get the results and 2A
hours. You have got to give local
authorities the power to act quickly
if there is a break—out in their
if there is a break-out in their
area. You
if there is a break—out in their
area. You have got to get to 50,000
human tracers and have an app that
works that people have trust and
confidence in. Some of the challenge
is that confidence has been lost and
the government has to move quickly
to regain that confidence and also
keep the messaging straightforward
so people actually understand what
so peopla actually understand what
the
so people actually understand what
the rules are and what they have to
the mles are and what they have to
do. That
the rules are and what they have to
do. That was some of the concern
about Boris’s announcement a few
weeks ago because it
weeks ago because it was not clear
and people did not understand it.
and peopla did not understand it.
Ollie, you
and people did not understand it.
Ollie, you have got your hand up.
Yes, I
Yes, Ithink
Ollie, you have got your hand up.
Yes, I think the horse has bolted. I
was on the protest in Southampton
yesterday. There were a certain
amount of people, a fair amount of
amount of peopla, a fair amount of
peopla wearing
amount of people, a fair amount of
people wearing masks, but an awful
peopla wearing masks, but an awful
lot that
people wearing masks, but an awful
lot that were not. And a lot of them
were people like me. I think that
one of the issues obviously coming
back to the recent report that it is
not even like there has been a cat
not even like there has been a rat
amongst the
not even like there has been a cat
amongst the pigeons. Your government
have not been clear
have not been clear enough on why we
are affected more by COVID—19. Has
are affected more by COVID-19. Has
your
are affected more by COVID—19. Has
your government gone to Africa, for
example, which has a better record
than we have in the UK? Has your
government gone to the countries
with the origins where people are
with the origins where peopla are
more
with the origins where people are
more vulnerable? The horse has
bolted and as a parent I would say
the energy of the government now
needs to go into mitigation because
even with the track and testing I
think a significant amount of people
think a significant amount of peopla
will not
think a significant amount of people
will not be interested and will not
be listening. This is a fact and
there needs to be energy put into
how ran
how can we mitigate against the fact
how ran we mitigate against the fact
that people
how can we mitigate against the fact
that people are now not listening?
that peopla are now not listening?
Flora.
that people are now not listening?
Flora. Touching on Ben’s point about
the economy, I think maybe the
conversation around that needs to be
focused more on the inequalities
that arise. There are studies that
suggest mortality rate improves in
situations of economic crises, but
you really need to be focusing on
how we need to try and reduce the
inequalities that will be arising
there. Secondly, we have seen the
trust in government absolutely
plummet ever since the Prime
Minister’s special adviser broke his
own lockdown rules, and yet the
own lockdown mles, and yet the
trust in
own lockdown rules, and yet the
trust in scientists like Chris
whitty is
Whitty is incredibly high and I was
whitty is incredibly high and I was
wondering
Whitty is incredibly high and I was
wondering whether we should discuss
whether the scientists should have
more influence in the policies that
more inﬂuence in the policies that
are being
more influence in the policies that
are being made rather than acting as
an advisory group. Lorraine? One of
the things they produced on the
lockdown was allowing people to
lockdown was allowing peopla to
travel long
lockdown was allowing people to
travel long distances, any distance,
to exercise. Of course all the
south—west where we had really low
south-west where we had really low
infection
south—west where we had really low
infection rates has been invaded
from hordes of people coming to the
beaches and the beauty spots, who
come from areas of the UK that have
very high rates, and yet the
government have not addressed that.
Nadhim Cumming coming to my’s
Nadhim Cumming coming to mrs
question, is
Nadhim Cumming coming to my’s
question, is the lockdown being
eased too quickly before track and
trace is fully operational and
proven? Are we risking more deaths?
First of all, we have been
deliberately slow, baby steps.
Initially there was a huge pressure
on the Prime Minister to open all
nonessential retail by the lst of
nonessential retail by the 1st of
june and the
nonessential retail by the ist of
June and the Prime
nonessential retail by the 1st of
June and the Prime Minister said,
june and the Prime Minister said,
no, we will
June and the Prime Minister said,
no, we will look at car showrooms
no, we will look at far showrooms
and
no, we will look at car showrooms
and outdoor markets and if we
continue to bear down on the R
number, by the 15th of
number, by the 15th ofJune we will
number, by the 15th of june we will
open up
number, by the 15th ofJune we will
open up nonessential retail. I am
the business and industry minister
and I have been working on all the
different guidelines for different
environments of work, outdoor,
indoor, construction and retail. We
indoor, constmction and retail. We
have got task
indoor, construction and retail. We
have got task forces led by
ministers, looking at pubs and
restaurants, places of worship,
theatres, salons, for example, all
the difficult areas of work. We are
doing all of that work at the same
time. Track and trace, the pilot
that we ran in the Isle of Wight,
one of the important findings of
that is that people said the first
that is that peopla said the first
contact
that is that people said the first
contact they want is with a human
being, which is why we have
recruited 25,000 people who can deal
recruited 25,000 peopla who ran deal
with
recruited 25,000 people who can deal
with about 10,000 cases... When are
with about 10,000 cases... when are
we going to get
with about 10,000 cases... When are
we going to get figures because it
has been a week now since track and
trace was launched? We have had some
trace was hunched? We have had some
figures that were
trace was launched? We have had some
figures that were leaked to Channel
4 News, which suggested very few
people have been contacted. When are
people have been contacted. when are
we going to get
people have been contacted. When are
we going to get figures? A very good
question and we are working ﬂat out
to make sure we get
question and we are working flat out
to make sure we get the figures
right. The other question that links
to your question is the figures have
to be robust and accurate, which is
what the statisticians have asked
us. You want to make sure that the
statistis
statistics authority does not
criticise you? We want to make sure
the figures we are releasing are
accurate and to get them right
because people are being tracked and
traced and tested in different
modes, whether through going to a
physical point... When will we get
physical point... when will we get
them?
physical point... When will we get
them? When we think they are robust
them? when we think they are robust
we will
them? When we think they are robust
we will start issuing the figures
and make sure that the app is then
and make sure that the app is than
fully rolled out
and make sure that the app is then
fully rolled out nationally. We are
also asking local authorities to
also asking [oral authorities to
have a
also asking local authorities to
have a local plan ready. For the
have a [oral plan ready. For the
first time,
have a local plan ready. For the
first time, and this is really
important, Mike, in terms of your
question, it is about confidence.
The first time when the track and
trace system is fully operational we
will be ahead of the virus, not
behind it. If there is a spike in
Wimbledon or in Stratford—upon—Avon,
Wimbladon or in Stratford-upon-Avon,
we will be
Wimbledon or in Stratford—upon—Avon,
we will be ahead of it and that way
we ran
we can react very quickly with the
we ran react very quickly with the
[oral
we can react very quickly with the
local authority to control the virus
[oral authority to control the virus
in the
local authority to control the virus
in the area so we do not have to
dose
close down the whole country as we
close down the whola country as we
and
close down the whole country as we
and other countries have been doing
because the pandemic has been
spreading so quickly around the
world. We have got very little time
left. When will we get to 50,000
left. when will we get to 50,000
traces?
left. When will we get to 50,000
traces? When will the app to be
traces? when will the app to be
ready? We
traces? When will the app to be
ready? We are working ﬂat out, we
want to make sure it does everything
it needs to do and it will be in
place this month. I cannot give you
place this month. I rannot give you
an exact
place this month. I cannot give you
an exact date. It will be in place
this month? Let me be clear, the app
will be up and running this month?
will be up and mnning this month?
It was mnning in
will be up and running this month?
It was running in the Isle of Wight
It was mnning in the Isla of Night
and we
It was running in the Isle of Wight
and we will make sure it will be run
and we will make sure it will be nm
as soon as
and we will make sure it will be run
as soon as we think it is robust. It
will be in place this month? It will
be rolled out across the UK this
month? I would like to think we can
month? I would like to think we ran
do it by this
month? I would like to think we can
do it by this month, yes. We will
get you back. We are out of time. We
could have carried on for quite some
time. Thank you very much to the
panel and thank you very much to
Hugh for
Hugh forjoining us down the line
Hugh for joining us down the line
from
Hugh forjoining us down the line
from Aberdeen. Thank you very much
to our panel from Southampton this
week. Next week we will have a
virtual audience from Cardiff and
the week after
the week afterfrom
virtual audience from Cardiff and
the week after from Plymouth.
Contact us in the usual way and we
will get back to you and we will see
if we ran get
if we can get you on the programme.
if we ran get you on the programme.
If you want to
if we can get you on the programme.
If you want to carry on the
discussion, you can
discussion, you canjoin Adrian
discussion, you ranjoin Adrian
Childs
discussion, you canjoin Adrian
Childs and guests on Question Time
Extra Time now. But thank you to all
of you for watching.
Welcome to the month—long party.
Brilliant! Brilliant goal!
It’s unbelievable!
One of the most sensational matches
the European Championship
has ever seen!
What a turn, what a goal!
I don’t believe it!
He has only gone and done it!
Not many players can do that.
I have never, ever witnessed
anything like this.
who said there
were too many repeats on the BBC?
Rewind to the best of the Euros.
How did last night end?
I’m starting to write
about my experiences.
First time?
Yeah.
SIRENS WAIL
HORNS BLARE
Where does it go?
# You don’t have to say you love me
# Just be close at hand...
LAUGHTER
# You don’t have to stay forever
# I will understand...
Heroes only get the girl
in Hollywood.
# Believe me...
HE CHUCKLES
# Believe me... #
Killing Eve...
This has not been a good
week for my fragile ego
because I was flicking
through Good Housekeeping magazine,
Kirstie Allsopp on the front cover,
but, on page 3A, Vicki Young,
chief political
correspondent, it’s you!
It’s me!
I know, it’s incredible!
How did that happen?
Very interesting, especially hearing
that Clark Kent inspired
you to be a journalist.
And then things get
even worse for my ego.
This week’s Grazia, page
nine, Chart of Lust,
next to Michaeljordan,
Chris Mason!
Hello.
In the Chart of Lust.
What page were you on, Vicki?
34?
0h, stop it!
Chris, you’re in the Chart of Lust
alongside Michaeljordan,
Alexis from Schitt’s Creek and (“ardi
B.
Big Cardi B fan?
It’s nothing to do
with my winter outfits.
I think Cardi was marginally
above me in the chart,
but there’s always next week.
She is, but she wasn’t on Gogglebox.
How was that?
To make matters even worse!
It all came about...
The brief story is it came
about because we’re now having,
in the absence of make—up people,
to use technological
gadgetry when we appear
on the telly, like this.
Good morning.
Welcome to Breakfast
with Chris Mason and Rachel Burden.
I like Chris Mason.
I like the confidence he has
to part his hair in the middle.
I love it!
Did you catch Eurovision last night?
Yes, we did.
We watched it!
Did I BLEEP, Chris!
The Coronavirus Newscast
from the BBC.
Hello, it’s Adam in the studio.
And Vicki Young in the studio.
And Chris in my socially—distant
cupboard of news.
Just down the corridor.
Now, a long—running theme
of this podcast, Vicki,
has been face masks or,
as we call them now, face coverings,
and the advice that has changed
through time in different parts
of the UK about when and when not
to wear them and how to wear
them safely if you do.
Cast your mind back to the 3rd
of April and whenJonathan Van—Tam,
the Deputy Chief Medical Officer
for England, said this.
There is no evidence that general
wearing of face masks by the public
who are well affects the spread
of the disease in our society.
What matters right now
is social distancing.
And what is the government saying
about masks right now?
Well, the announcement came today —
from the 15th ofJune in England it
will be compulsory to wear a face
covering of some kind
on public transport —
something that, for example,
the Mayor of London,
Sadiq Khan, has been talking
about for almost two months —
and, if you don’t do that,
you will not be allowed to travel
and you could end up being fined.
The government has, I think,
reluctantly eventually ended up
in this place and inevitably
lots of people are saying,
this is far too slow,
why didn’t you do it ages ago?
And the government are saying,
now is the time to do it
because we’re starting
to open things up.
Here’s how Grant Shapps,
the Transport Secretary,
broke it to the plane,
train, bus and tram—using
public today.
As of Monday the 15th ofJune,
face coverings will become mandatory
on public transport.
That doesn’t mean surgical
masks, which we must keep
for clinical settings.
It means the kind of face covering
you can easily make at home.